Copied verbatim from https://gist.github.com/yossorion/4965df74fd6da6cdc280ec57e83a202d

---

# What I Wish I'd Known About Equity Before Joining A Unicorn

**Disclaimer:** This piece is written anonymously. The names of a few
particular companies are mentioned, but as common examples only.

This is a short write-up on things that I wish I'd known and
considered before joining a private company (aka startup, aka unicorn
in some cases). I'm not trying to make the case that you should
_never_ join a private company, but the power imbalance between
founder and employee is extreme, and that potential candidates would
do well to consider alternatives.

None of this information is new or novel, but this document aims to
put the basics in one place.

## The Rub

### Lock In

* After leaving a company, you generally have 90 days to exercise
  your options or they're gone. This seems to have originally
  developed around a historical rule from the IRS around the
  treatment of ISOs, but the exact reason doesn't really matter
  anymore. The only thing that does matter is that if you ever want
  to leave your company, all that equity that you spent years
  building could evaporate if you don't have the immediate cash
  reserves to buy into it.

* Worse yet, by exercising options you owe tax immediately on money
  that you never made. Your options have a _strike price_ and private
  companies generally have a _409A valuation_ to determine their fair
  market value. You owe tax on the difference between those two
  numbers multiplied by the number of options exercised, even if the
  illiquidity of the shares means that you never made a cent, and
  have no conceivable way of doing so for the forseeable future.

* Even if you have the money to buy your options and pay the taxman,
  that cash is now locked in and could see little return on
  investment for a long and uncertain amount of time. Consider the
  opportunity cost of what you could otherwise have done with that
  liquid capital.

* Due to tax law, there is a ten year limit on the exercise term of
  ISO options from the day they're granted. Even if the shares aren't
  liquid by then, you either lose them or exercise them, with
  exercising them coming with all the caveats around cost and
  taxation listed above.
  
  Does ten years sound like a long time? Consider the ages of these
  unicorns:

    * Palantir is now thirteen years old.
    * Dropbox will be ten years old this year (2017).
    * AirBnB, GitHub, and Uber are all within a year or two of their
      ten year birthdays.

* Some companies now offer 10-year exercise window (after you quit)
  whereby your ISOs are automatically converted to NSOs after 90
  days. This is strictly better for the employee than a 90-day
  window, but as previously mentioned, ten years still might not be
  enough.

* Golden handcuffs kick in fast. The longer you stay with a company,
  the more equity you build, and a decision to leave becomes that
  much harder. This can culminate to the point where early employees
  have modest liquid assets but are "paper millionaires", and have to
  make the hard decision to throw all that away or stick around until
  their founders allow them some return.

### Liquidity Events

* No time horizon for any kind of liquidation guaranteed. In fact,
  _no liquidation event_ is ever guaranteed, even if the company is
  highly successful. One could be at 1 year out, 5 years, 10 years,
  or never. We've seen a lot of evidence in this day and age that
  companies are staying private for longer (see the list above).

* The incentive to IPO between employer and employee are not aligned.
  Employees want some kind of liquidation event so that they can
  extract some of the value they helped create, but employers know
  that allowing employees to extract that value might cost them some
  of their best people as they're finally allowed the opportunity to
  pursue other projects. One more reason to stay private for longer.

    * Although the above is one reason that founders don't want to
      IPO, it's not the _only_ reason. Many of them do believe
      (rightly or wrongly) that there is another 10x/100x worth of
      growth left in the company, and that by pulling the trigger too
      early on an IPO all of that potential will be lost. For a
      normal founder, their company is their life's work, and they're
      willing to wait a few more years to see the canvas fully
      realized. This is a more noble reason not to liquidate, but
      from an employee's perspective, is still problematic.

### Founder/Employee Power Imbalance

* Founders (and favored lieutenants) can arrange take money off the
  table while raising rounds and thus become independently wealthy
  even before they make true "fuck you" money from a large scale
  liquidation event. Employees cannot. The situation is totally
  asymmetric, and most of us are on the wrong end of that.

* Even if you came into a company with good understanding of its cap
  table, the ground can shift under your feet. New shares can be
  issued at any time to dilute your position. In fact, it's common
  for dilution to occur during any round of fundraising.

### Private Markets

* Private markets do exist that trade private stock and even help
  with the associated tax liabilities. However, it's important to
  consider that this sort of assistance will come at a very high
  cost, and you'll almost certainly lose a big chunk of your upside.
  Also, depending on the company you join, they may have restricted
  your ability to trade private shares without special approval from
  the board.

### Valuations

* Especially in early stage companies, equity is offered on the basis
  of a highly theoretical future valuation number. Sam Altman
  recommends offering the first ten employees 10% (~1% each), which
  could be a big number if the company sells for $10B, but consider
  how few companies actually make it to that level.
  
  If the company sells for a more modest $250M, between taxes and the
  dilution that inevitably will have occurred, your 1% won't net you
  as much as you'd intuitively think. It will probably be on the same
  order as what you might have made from RSUs at a large public
  company, but with far far more risk involved. Don't take my word
  for it though; it's pretty simple math to run the numbers for a
  spread of sale prices and dilution factors for yourself before
  joining, so do so.

### Tender Offers

* Some companies acknowledge the effect of drawn out phases of
  illiquidity on employees and engage in a tender offer to give
  employees some return (google around for some examples). I don't
  want to overstate this because receiving a tender offer is strictly
  better than the alternative, but keep in mind that one will
  probably be structured to minimize the amount of value you can
  extract. They're also very likely be infrequent events. Read the
  fine print, run the numbers, and consider how much your annual
  return _to date_ will actually be (including all the time you've
  spent at the company, not just the year of the offer). It's
  probably less than what you could've gotten in RSU grants at a
  public company.

### Working Environment

* This isn't equity related, but it's worth considering that the
  environment at a big unicorn isn't going to be measurably different
  from a big public company. You're going to have little impact per
  employee, the same draconian IT security policies, lots of
  meetings, and fixed PTO. In the worst cases, you might even have to
  use JIRA.

## I'm Doing It Anyway!

So you decided to join a private company anyway. Here's a few
questions that I'd recommend knowing the answer to before accepting
any offer (you'd be amazed at how infrequently this information is
volunteered):

* How long is my exercise window if I leave the company?

* How many outstanding shares are there? (This will allow you to
  calculate your ownership in the company.)

* Does the company's leaders want it to be sold or go public? If so,
  what is the rough time horizon for such an event? (Don't take "we
  don't know" for an answer.)

* Have there been any secondary sales for shares by employees or
  founders? (Try it route out whether founders are taking money off
  the table when they raise money, and whether there has been a
  tender offer for employees.)

* Assuming no liquidation, are my shares salable on a private market?

* Has the company taken on debt or investment with a liquidation
  preference of more than 1x? (Investors may have been issued > 1x
  liquidation preference, which means they get paid out at that
  multiple before anyone else gets anything.)

* Will you give me an extended exercise window? (After joining I
  realized that most people's window was the standard 90 days, but
  not _everyone's_. Unfortunately by then I'd lost my negotiating
  leverage to ask for an extended term.)

It's really tough to ask these without sounding obsessed with money,
which feels unseemly, but you have to do it anyway. The "you" of
today needs to protect the "you" of tomorrow.

## Summary

Working at a startup can be fun, rewarding, interesting, and maybe
even lucrative. The working conditions at Silicon Valley companies
are often the best in the world; it's quite conceivable that you
might want to stay there even if there was never a possibility of a
payoff. But don't forget that as far as equity is concerned, every
card in the deck is stacked against you.

The correct amount to value your options at is $0. Think of them more
as a lottery ticket. If they pay off, great, but your employment deal
should be good enough that you'd still join even if they weren't in
your contract.

I don't say this just because of the possibility that your startup
could fail, but also because even in the event of success, there are
plenty of scenarios where getting a payout will be difficult. Say for
example that five years in you want to try something new, or want to
start a family and need a job that will pay you well enough to let
you afford a starter home in the Bay Area (not easy). Your startup
Monopoly money will put you in a precarious position.

If you're lucky enough to be in high enough demand that you can
consider _either_ a public company with good stock liquidity _or_ a
billion-dollar unicorn, give serious consideration to the former.
